docs/development.md, before:

# Glitchlings development setup

This guide walks through preparing a local development environment, running the automated checks, and exercising the optional Rust acceleration layer.

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- `pip` and a virtual environment tool of your choice (the examples below use `python -m venv`)
- [Optional] A Rust toolchain (`rustup` or system packages) and [`maturin`](https://www.maturin.rs/) for compiling the PyO3 extensions

## Install the project

1. Clone the repository and create an isolated environment:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/osoleve/glitchlings.git
   cd glitchlings
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate
   ```

2. Install the package in editable mode with the development dependencies:

   ```bash
   pip install -e .[dev]
   ```

   Add the `prime` extra (`pip install -e .[dev,prime]`) when you need the Prime Intellect integration and its `verifiers` dependency.

3. If you plan to use the Jargoyle glitchling, download the WordNet corpus once per machine:

   ```bash
   python -m nltk.downloader wordnet
   ```

## Run the test suite

Execute the automated tests from the repository root:

```bash
pytest
```

The suite covers determinism guarantees, dataset integrations, and parity between Python and Rust implementations. When the WordNet corpus is unavailable, the Jargoyle-specific tests skip automatically.

## Rust acceleration

Glitchlings ships PyO3 extensions that accelerate Typogre, Mim1c, Reduple, Adjax, Rushmore, Redactyl, and Scannequin. Compile them with `maturin`; the Python interfaces pick them up automatically when available:

```bash
# Compile the shared Rust crate (rerun after Rust or Python updates)
maturin develop -m rust/zoo/Cargo.toml

# Optional: disable the fast path before importing glitchlings
export GLITCHLINGS_RUST_PIPELINE=0
```

`Gaggle` prefers the compiled fast path whenever the extension is importable. Set the environment variable to `0`/`false` (or any other falsey value) to force the pure-Python orchestrator when debugging or profiling. The test suite automatically covers both code paths - re-run `pytest` once normally and once with the flag set to `0` to verify changes across implementations.


## Additional tips

- Rebuild the Rust extension after editing files under `rust/zoo/`:

  ```bash
  maturin develop -m rust/zoo/Cargo.toml
  ```

- Use `python -m glitchlings --help` to smoke-test CLI changes quickly.
- Check `docs/index.md` for end-user guidance - keep it in sync with behaviour changes when you ship new glitchlings or orchestration features.
- When a TestPyPI publish fails, re-trigger the "Build & Publish (TestPyPI)" GitHub Actions workflow or fast-forward `dev` to rerun the pipeline - see `docs/release-process.md` for the manual steps.

Commit message:

Codex/implement glitchlings lexicon refactor plan (#100)
* Add configurable lexicon defaults and CLI cache builder

* Refactor Jargoyle lexicon handling

* Correct default rate for word replacement to 0.01 in Jargoyle and related documentation

docs/development.md, after:

# Glitchlings development setup

This guide walks through preparing a local development environment, running the automated checks, and exercising the optional Rust acceleration layer.

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- `pip` and a virtual environment tool of your choice (the examples below use `python -m venv`)
- [Optional] A Rust toolchain (`rustup` or system packages) and [`maturin`](https://www.maturin.rs/) for compiling the PyO3 extensions

## Install the project

1. Clone the repository and create an isolated environment:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/osoleve/glitchlings.git
   cd glitchlings
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate
   ```

2. Install the package in editable mode with the development dependencies:

   ```bash
   pip install -e .[dev]
   ```

   Add the `prime` extra (`pip install -e .[dev,prime]`) when you need the Prime Intellect integration and its `verifiers` dependency.
   Enable the embedding-backed lexicon helpers with the `vectors` extra (`pip install -e .[dev,vectors]`) to pull in `numpy`, `spaCy`, and `gensim`.

3. The package ships a compact vector-cache for Jargoyle so you can exercise synonym swaps without heavyweight models. Regenerate or extend that cache with the bundled CLI when you have larger embeddings available:

   ```bash
   glitchlings build-lexicon \
       --source spacy:en_core_web_md \
       --output data/vector_lexicon.json \
       --limit 50000 \
       --overwrite
   ```

   The command accepts gensim-compatible KeyedVectors or Word2Vec formats via `--source /path/to/vectors.kv`. Pass `--tokens words.txt` to restrict caching to a curated vocabulary, tweak `--min-similarity`/`--max-neighbors` to trade breadth for precision, and bake in deterministic seeds with `--seed`.

   Working with ConceptNet Numberbatch instead? Point the `GraphLexicon` at the gzipped embedding dump and let it derive synonyms directly. Persist the results with `graph.save_cache("data/graph_lexicon.json")` so repeated runs avoid reloading the full matrix when the embeddings are unavailable.

   Need to sanity-check new lexical sources? Import `glitchlings.lexicon.metrics` and call `compare_lexicons(...)` to benchmark synonym diversity, ≥3-substitute coverage, and mean cosine similarity against previously captured baselines.

   Prefer the legacy WordNet behaviour? Install `nltk`, download its WordNet corpus (`python -m nltk.downloader wordnet`), and update `config.toml` so the `lexicon.priority` includes `"wordnet"` ahead of the vector cache.

## Run the test suite

Execute the automated tests from the repository root:

```bash
pytest
```

The suite covers determinism guarantees, dataset integrations, and parity between Python and Rust implementations. Vector-backed lexicons ship with the repository so the Jargoyle tests run without external downloads, while optional WordNet checks are gated behind the legacy backend being available.

## Rust acceleration

Glitchlings ships PyO3 extensions that accelerate Typogre, Mim1c, Reduple, Adjax, Rushmore, Redactyl, and Scannequin. Compile them with `maturin`; the Python interfaces pick them up automatically when available:

```bash
# Compile the shared Rust crate (rerun after Rust or Python updates)
maturin develop -m rust/zoo/Cargo.toml

# Optional: disable the fast path before importing glitchlings
export GLITCHLINGS_RUST_PIPELINE=0
```

`Gaggle` prefers the compiled fast path whenever the extension is importable. Set the environment variable to `0`/`false` (or any other falsey value) to force the pure-Python orchestrator when debugging or profiling. The test suite automatically covers both code paths - re-run `pytest` once normally and once with the flag set to `0` to verify changes across implementations.


## Additional tips

- Rebuild the Rust extension after editing files under `rust/zoo/`:

  ```bash
  maturin develop -m rust/zoo/Cargo.toml
  ```

- Use `python -m glitchlings --help` to smoke-test CLI changes quickly.
- Check `docs/index.md` for end-user guidance - keep it in sync with behaviour changes when you ship new glitchlings or orchestration features.
- When a TestPyPI publish fails, re-trigger the "Build & Publish (TestPyPI)" GitHub Actions workflow or fast-forward `dev` to rerun the pipeline - see `docs/release-process.md` for the manual steps.
